Draft Grant Proposal for OrbitDB Pinning Devnet (#1)
aphelionz/devgrants: open-grant-proposals/orbitdb-pinning/README.md

> # Open Grant Proposal: `OrbitDB Pinning DevNet`

Reviewer: is the target solution a DevNet? that kind of suggests a testing purpose rather than a permanent solution; even if our work could enable the creation of a pinning devnet, I would rather call it something like "Filecoin-backed OrbitDB" or "A net-zero pinning network for OrbitDB" etc.

Author: Edited the title, please resolve if you like that better.

**Name of Project:** `OrbitDB Pinning DevNet`

**Proposal Category:** `app-dev`

**Proposer:** `@aphelionz` on behalf of `@eqlabs`

**Do you agree to open source all work you do on behalf of this RFP and dual-license under MIT and APACHE2 licenses?:** Yes

# Project Description

[OrbitDB](https://github.com/orbitdb/orbit-db) is a distributed database engine that stores its data on IPFS as

> Conflict-free Replicated Data Types (CRDTs). OrbitDB has a number of prominent users including [Metamask], [bitcoin.com](https://bitcoin.com), [3Box](https://3box.io/), [AvionDB](https://dbdb.io/db/aviondb), and [BitcoinCash](https://www.bitcoincash.org/).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Conflict-free Replicated Data Types (CRDTs). OrbitDB has a number of prominent users including [Metamask](https://metamask.io), [bitcoin.com](https://bitcoin.com), [3Box](https://3box.io/), [AvionDB](https://dbdb.io/db/aviondb), and [BitcoinCash](https://www.bitcoincash.org/).
```

Of all the features and improvements requested by our community, reliable pinning is perhaps the most common. An OrbitDB 
user wants their data to persist in the distributed swarm safely and reliably, with minimal configuration and attention required.

This harmonizes with the adage that token economies work well when they're completely hidden from the user and handle 

> "under the hood" accounting. In the case of OrbitDB, the system could theoretically handle both sides of the the data 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
accounting "under the hood". In the case of OrbitDB, the system could theoretically handle both sides of the the data 
```

storage transaction. OrbitDB nodes can be both miners and requestors of the data stored, and nature of the commodity that 
the token represents - in this case data storage - makes a "take what you give" economy feasible.

> If this grant is funded, we will deliver a new Filecoin devnet to power a baseline 'net-zero" community swarm of any 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If this grant is funded, we will deliver a new Filecoin devnet to power a baseline "net-zero" community swarm for any 
```

OrbitDB instance that wants to opt-in, allowing people to create and respond to "replication requests" from each other.

> This would happen as opaquely as possible, i.e. it shoud "just work."

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This would happen as opaquely as possible, i.e. it should "just work."
```

## Value

At nearly [4,500 GitHub](https://github.com/orbitdb/orbit-db/stargazers) stars, OrbitDB is one of the more high-profile 
projects in the `js-ipfs` ecosystem. The benefits of this have so far been twofold:

> 1. Raising awareness of IPFS through its transient use in OrbitDB

Reviewer 2: Transient might not be the word we are looking for here, isn't it the opposite of persistent? Perhaps `transitive`?

2. Driving improvements in IPFS itself due to community demand and response to OrbitDB

> 

Reviewer: 3. Providing an example of a net-zero/non-profit network/community within Filecoin?

We predict that something similar could happen with regards to Filecoin. The adopters of this pinning network could 
provide valuable context and feeback to Filecoin, and drive the project roadmap forward. However, this is not guaranteed, 
and not without risks.

### TODO Risks

> #### OrbitDB's pinning requirements differ slightly in terms of sector size and uptime requirements

Reviewer: differ from what? maybe it's better to just have "OrbitDB's pinning requirements" as a headline here

Author: Added!

> Due to some differences in the behavior of OrbitDB and the expectati

Reviewer: there is only half a paragraph here

> #### DevNet opt-in rates might be

Reviewer: this headline is only partially complete

> 

Reviewer: As an extra risk I think it is only fair to include last-minute changes in Filecoin network/client behavior; we've already had issues trying to catch up to the chain

### Benefits

> Despite the risks, the Filecoin project still stands to benefit from this effort, no matter the outcome of the implementation or the devnet launch.

Reviewer: that might just be me, but this sentence sounds a bit pessimistic; a broader "we see the following benefits for the Filecoin ecosystem:" would be preferable IMO

- If the implementation is executed as planned and the launch is successful, then it shoudl 
- If there are issues that impede the delivery of the implementation or that prevent devnet adoption, then those will be 

> valuable

Reviewer: as before, I would concentrate strictly on the benefits here (without "if"s and "unless"es); the risks were already outlined in the previous section, and this is the "happy path" :wink:

## TODO Deliverables

Please describe in details what your final deliverable for this project will be. Include a specification of the project and what functionality the software will deliver when it is finished.

> 

Reviewer: if possible, I would not be painfully specific here, as I'm not sure how we can achieve the net-zero effect (there's possibly a few venues we might consider, and Filecoin might need to guide us here), but the end deliverable would probably be e.g. a docker image with a few OrbitDb nodes connected to each other using the Filecoin network in addition to the regular IPFS one and showcasing the net-zero effect.

## TODO Development Roadmap

> 

Reviewer: I think the steps would be:
1. research OrbitDB <> FIlecoin interaction wrt. entering the network, relationship with "regular" nodes, tweaks/changes/config needed to enable net-zero interaction between OrbitDB nodes
2. create a prototype OrbitDB+Filecoin node that is able to exhibit the aforementioned features
3. build a UI to allow regular users to take advantage of functionalities introduced in point 2

> Note: This is subject to change as the project and Filecoin itself mature over the comining months

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Note: This is subject to change as the project and Filecoin itself mature over the coming months
```

> ![On Database created](./img/database-created.png)

Reviewer 2: The file name here is a bit confusing, not sure what the diagram depicts.. Everything is buffered, possibly only on the "network" (not the pinner) until there are enough messages that the total is over the sector size?

> ![Replication request received](./img/replication-request-received.png)

Reviewer 2: What is the replication request? Does this depict an automatized storage deal making according to some configurable pinner parameters?

On the box on the right, the "Store Encrypted Data from Network" should probably be "Data *to* Network".

Author: No, "from network" is correct since you are the miner and the data are coming in from an external source, aka the network

> This section needs to be very detailed (will vary on the project, but aim for around 2 pages for this section).

1. DevNet Setup

> USing the lotus filecoin ststem, we propose to create a devnet with small sector sizes

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Using the lotus filecoin ststem, we propose to create a devnet with small sector sizes
```

> USing the lotus filecoin ststem, we propose to create a devnet with small sector sizes

Reviewer: instead of saying "small" I'd go with "reduced", as "small" is pretty subjective

Roughly 2 weeks of FT work for one developer

2. Create `orbitdb-filecoin-pinner`

3. DevNet launch

Roughly 1 month of FT work for 1 developer

> Deends on #1

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Depends on #1
```

For each milestone, please describe:
- The software functionality that we can expect after the completion of each milestone. This should be detailed enough that it can be used to ensure that the software meets the specification you outlined in the Deliverables.
- How many people will be working on each milestone and their roles
- The amount of funding required for each milestone
- How much time this milestone will take to achieve (using real dates)

## TODO Total Budget Requested

Sum up the total requested budget across all milestones, and include that figure here. Also, please include a budget breakdown to specify how you are planning to spend these funds.

## Maintenance and Upgrade Plans

> We want to make a codebase that will last into the future. Equilibrium Labs and MRH.io, along with the support of the community, pledge to continue to maintain the Rust IPFS to best of their ability and within any financial constraints that exist.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We want to make a codebase that will last into the future. Equilibrium Labs and MRH.io, along with the support of the community, pledge to continue to maintain the new OrbitDB functionalities to best of their ability and within any financial constraints that exist.
```

Reviewer: unless I'm missing something here, Rust IPFS is not applicable to this proposal :stuck_out_tongue:

Much like we will build upon community efforts, we will also enable and encourage others to build upon our work. This will be a twofold effort that includes both permissive licensing and community outreach: onboarding as many new contributors as possible, mapping the work out into issues of different levels of difficulty, and providing mentorship.

# Team

## Team Members

- Samuli Pöyhtäri - OrbitDB Original Author [[github](https://github.com/haadcode)] [[linkedin](https://www.linkedin.com/in/samuli/)]
- Mark Henderson - OrbitDB Core Contributor [[github](https://github.com/aphelionz)] [[resume](https://ipfs.io/ipfs/QmcHxD94cvJgq5ZZxQkEi7SRMwD5dBnkhQ3zzaVFqNWFJb)]
- Vesa-Ville Piiroinen - OrbitDB Core Contributor [[github](https://github.com/vvp)] [[linkedin](https://www.linkedin.com/in/vesa-ville-piiroinen-5b6b14/)]

> - Lukasz Jędrzejczyk Blockchain Developer [[github](https://github.com/ljedrz)] [[linkedin](https://www.linkedin.com/in/ljedrz/)]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Lukasz Jędrzejczyk - Blockchain Developer [[github](https://github.com/ljedrz)] [[linkedin](https://www.linkedin.com/in/ljedrz/)]
```

## TODO Relevant Experience

Mark Henderson, in addition to being a Rust IPFS core contributor, is also a core contributor to OrbitDB, which is a CRDT-based database system reliant on IPFS. For over a year, his full-time job was working on OrbitDB which, in addition to adding features and increasing performance in the distributed OrbitDB system, entailed both dealing personally with the idiosyncrasies of IPFS and also helping community members do the same.

Lukasz Jedrzejczyk has followed the development of Rust since before it became stable in 2015 and has been a proactive contributor to the Rust compiler and its StackOverflow community. He has participated in the creation of the Concordium blockchain and its ecosystem, concentrating on its client's network capabilities.

Vesa-Ville is the Chief Research Officer at Equilibrium. As former CTO and co-founder of Haja Networks, he worked on the original theory, research and design of the Ambients, a protocol for distributing and executing deterministic programs safely in a decentralized, content-addressed network like IPFS. He has decades of experience in distributed systems, databases, and interoperability solutions.

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion

TODO: samuli

```

Together, we believe this team is uniquely qualified to complete this task, both the implementation and communicating with the community in terms of the provided reference implementation and best practices when using, implementing, and interacting with IPFS in general.

## Team code repositories

> - https://github.com/ipfs-rust/rust-ipfs

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- https://github.com/rs-ipfs/rust-ipfs
```

**Proposal Category:** `app-dev`

**Proposer:** `@aphelionz` on behalf of `@eqlabs`

**Do you agree to open source all work you do on behalf of this RFP and dual-license under MIT and
APACHE2 licenses?:** Yes

# Project Description

[OrbitDB](https://github.com/orbitdb/orbit-db) is a distributed database engine that stores its
data on IPFS as Conflict-free Replicated Data Types (CRDTs). OrbitDB has a number of prominent
users including [Metamask](https://metamask.io), [bitcoin.com](https://bitcoin.com),
[3Box](https://3box.io/), [AvionDB](https://dbdb.io/db/aviondb),
and [BitcoinCash](https://www.bitcoincash.org/).

Of all the features and improvements requested by our community, reliable pinning is perhaps the
most common. An OrbitDB user wants their data to persist in the distributed swarm safely and
reliably, with minimal configuration and attention required.

This harmonizes with the adage that token economies work well when they're completely hidden from
the user and handle accounting "under the hood". In the case of OrbitDB, the system could
theoretically handle both sides of the the data storage transaction. OrbitDB nodes can be both

> miners and requestors of the data stored, and nature of the commodity that the token represents -

Reviewer: ```suggestion
miners and requestors of the data stored, and the nature of the commodity that the token represents -
```

in this case data storage - makes a "take what you give" economy feasible.

> If this grant is funded, we will deliver a new Filecoin devnet to power a baseline "net-zero"

Reviewer: again - this might just be me, but we might want to be more "sensitive" with the term "devnet" (which to me suggests a separate testbed for devs) - a "sub-network" or "a net-zero cluster belonging to the Filecoin network" might be better descriptions of the end goal

Author: Ah, you're right. I need to do a ctrl+F "devnet" in this proposal to make sure I only mention it in Milestone 1. I'll leave this comment open to make sure I don't forget.

community swarm for any OrbitDB instance that wants to opt-in, allowing people to create and
respond to "replication requests" from each other. This would happen as opaquely as possible, i.e.
it should "just work."

## Value

At nearly [4,500 GitHub](https://github.com/orbitdb/orbit-db/stargazers) stars, OrbitDB is one of
the more high-profile projects in the `js-ipfs` ecosystem. This means we have a track record of

> positive impacts OrbitDB has already had on a prominent Protocol Labs project.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
positive impact OrbitDB has already had on a prominent Protocol Labs project.
```

The benefits of this have so far been:

1. Raising awareness of IPFS through its transitive use in OrbitDB
2. Driving improvements in IPFS due to community demand and response to OrbitDB

It follows, then, that something similar could happen with regards to Filecoin. The process of
implementing this pinning network, and the users of the pinning network could provide valuable
context and feedback to the Filecoin Project, and drive the project roadmap forward.

### Risks

Of course, this outcome is not guaranteed, and not without risk. During the initial planning
process the grant team has identified the following risks that could impact either the
implementation process or the desired outcome of the grant effort. Under each risk heading
is a analysis of the risk's likelihood and impact, as well as an analysis and mitigation.

#### Differences between the requirements and design of OrbitDB vs Filecoin

Filecoin's desired sector sizes might be greater than the ones applicable to/practical with OrbitDB

> the uptime requirements in Filecoin might be too strict for non-profit purposes. This is the reason

Reviewer: ```suggestion
and the uptime requirements in Filecoin might be too strict for non-profit purposes. This is the reason
```

> why we are choosing to create our own DevNet as a "proving ground" for the concept itself since,

Reviewer: ok, so this nullifies my earlier comment; however, I would still provide this explanation as soon as the "devnet" term is first introduced so as to avoid misinterpretation; also, it would be prudent to state that we would want this to become a part of the main Filecoin network

Author: I still think that leaving the project open to a MainNet integration is valid

Reviewer: I believe it too; I just want to avoid any possibility of a feeling that we are doing a purely research/prototype project

> despite the name, the devnet would function as intended even without the tokens being traded.

Reviewer: I'm not sure if it is possible to not exchange tokens within the Filecoin logic, it might be safer to omit this bit; also, the point about the name is unclear to me

Author: the name 'DevNet"

Reviewer: that I do get, but why is it relevant to tokens? they are also flying around in blockchain devnets

Author: I mean people can't _profit_ off them in fiat? How would I say that?

Reviewer: profit isn't a concern for a devnet, though - I would just drop that last bit (i.e. end with "for the concept") to avoid any possibility of misinterpretation (as tokenomics are the hottest topic for blockchains, especially at this investment scale)

For this concept to work, there will need to be a number of guarantees in place, regardless of
OrbitDB's requirements - there will need to be enough copies of the data available on the network
to pin reliably, which means we will need a consistent amount of online nodes. While we will still
need more relaxed uptime and smaller sector sizes, Equilibrium can mitigate this risk by
maintaining one or more persistent nodes that can carry a larger amount of data than a typical
OrbitDB node.

#### Last-minute changes/issues with Filecoin network/client behavior

As of this writing, Filecoin is still in active development prior to its planned MainNet launch.
Things can and will change fast, potentially even after the MainNet launch. The grant team simply
accepts this risk and we will plan accordingly. The practical upshot of this is that we will allot
slightly more time in our milestone schedules to account for such contingencies.

### Benefits

If this project succeeds, OrbitDB's users will be happily pinning their data without having to know
too much about the underlying details, and Filecoin will have a successful example of a net-zero,

> non-profit pinning community running on its network.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
non-profit pinning community running within its network.
```

Also, as mentioned in the [value](#value) section above, the effort itself will raise awareness of
Filecoin as well as help steer the roadmap based on real-world usage.

> 

Reviewer: We can also add a point about encouraging more non-profit participants in the Filecoin network for the benefit of the whole Internet; this should resonate nicely with e.g. Filecoin's initiative to distribute hard disks with weather data

## Deliverables

We plan on breaking this work up into three smaller milestones, described in the next section. At
each milestone, we will deliver:

### Milestone 1 - Research and Design

- A formalized spec detailing the pinning network's functionality

> - A working DevNet with a reduced sector size

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- A working DevNet with parameters tailored to OrbitDB needs
```

### Milestone 1 - Research and Design

In this phase we will first set up a DevNet using the lotus instructions. This DevNet will have
reduced sector sizes (perhaps 5-10MB). Relaxing uptime requirements is something that is desired,
however this may not be feasible and will require additional research.

We will research relationship with "regular" nodes on MainNet, and how that might work.

As for the pinning network itself, the current (rough) design is:

![On Database created](./img/database-created.png)
![Replication request received](./img/replication-request-received.png)

- **Estimated duration:** 2 weeks
- **Estimated cost:** 4800€ / 5,390.71 USD

### Milestone 2 - Implementation

Once the spec has been created and the design details are more solidified, the next step will
be to create the implementation in the form of a JavaScript repository that interacts with
both OrbitDB and Filecoin.

Additionally, we will expand upon the OrbitDB Control Center project to build a UI to make it
simple for users to take advantage of the pinning functionalities, and understand their own
relationship in the context of the network - how much space they are providing, as well as how

> much space is available for them and their data.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
much space is available to them and their data.
```

- **Estimated duration:** 5 weeks
- **Estimated cost:** 24,000€ / 26,953.56 USD

### TODO Milestone 3 - Launch and Outreach

> this is of course a pretty big picture vision; after each of the steps we could deliver something:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This is of course a pretty big picture vision; after each of the steps we could deliver something:
```

- **Estimated duration:** 2 weeks
- **Estimated cost:** 4800€ / 5,390.71 USD

## Total Budget Requested

- **Total estimated duration:** 9 weeks
- **Total estimated cost:** 33,600€ / 37,734.98 USD

## Maintenance and Upgrade Plans

> We want to make a codebase that will last into the future. Equilibrium Labs along with the support

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We want to make a codebase that will last into the future. Equilibrium Labs, along with the support
```

> of the community, pledge to continue to maintain the new OrbitDB functionalities to best of their

Reviewer: ```suggestion
of the community, pledge to continue to maintain the new OrbitDB functionalities to the best of their
```

however this may not be feasible and will require additional research.

We will research relationship with "regular" nodes on MainNet, and how that might work.

As for the pinning network itself, the current (rough) design is:

![On Database created](./img/database-created.png)
![Replication request received](./img/replication-request-received.png)

- **Estimated duration:** 2 weeks
- **Estimated cost:** 4800€ / 5,390.71 USD

### Milestone 2 - Implementation

Once the spec has been created and the design details are more solidified, the next step will
be to create the implementation in the form of a JavaScript repository that interacts with
both OrbitDB and Filecoin.

Additionally, we will expand upon the OrbitDB Control Center project to build a UI to make it
simple for users to take advantage of the pinning functionalities, and understand their own
relationship in the context of the network - how much space they are providing, as well as how
much space is available for them and their data.

- **Estimated duration:** 5 weeks
- **Estimated cost:** 24,000€ / 26,953.56 USD

### TODO Milestone 3 - Launch and Outreach

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

- Social marketing efforts like posts and chat room announcements
- A docker image with a small OrbitDB net-zero community or node

## Development Roadmap

As per the [Risks](#risks) section, this is subject to change as the project and Filecoin
itself mature over the coming months.

Note: The budget in the milestone is based on the _equivalent_ of one full-time developer working
on the project at a time. This metric is used for ease of understanding and the work may be the
result of many team members via more granular chunks of work.

### Milestone 1 - Research and Design

In this phase we will first set up a DevNet using the
[lotus instructions](ttps://docs.lotu.sh/en+setup-local-dev-nethttps://docs.lotu.sh/en+setup-local-dev-net)
This DevNet will have reduced sector sizes (perhaps 5-10MB). Relaxing uptime requirements is something
that is desired, however this may not be feasible and will require additional research. We will also
research relationship with "regular" nodes on MainNet, and how that might work.

As for the pinning network itself, the current (rough) design is:

![On Database created](./img/database-created.png)

> Upon database creation, the OrbitDB node will also create a filecoin miner and daemon. If they are opted

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Upon database creation, the OrbitDB node will also create a Filecoin miner and start its daemon. If they are opted
```

> in, they will join the network and make available a user-specified amount of storage.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
in, they will join the Filecoin network and make a user-specified amount of storage available.
```

![Log entries added](./img/log-entries-added.png)

As log entries are added or replicated, the node will first check to see how many copies are currently
on the network. If the number of copies is below a user specified amount (for example, 5 copies) then
a request for storage is sent out to a random miner.

![Replication request received](./img/replication-request-received.png)

Since every OrbitDB node is both a miner and a network user, they can also receive storage requests.
When such a request for storage is received, the node will check its avaialble storage space in its
sectors, and fulfill the request if it is able.

- **Estimated duration:** 2 weeks
- **Estimated cost:** 4800€ / 5,390.71 USD

### Milestone 2 - Implementation

Once the spec has been created and the design details are more solidified, the next step will
be to create the implementation in the form of a JavaScript repository that interacts with
both OrbitDB and Filecoin.

> Additionally, we will expand upon the OrbitDB Control Center project to build a UI to make it

Reviewer 3: Add a link to OrbitDB Control Center, both inline here and in "Team code repositories" section

# Open Grant Proposal: `OrbitDB Net-Zero Pinning Community Network`

**Name of Project:** `OrbitDB Net-Zero Pinning Community Network`

**Proposal Category:** `app-dev`

**Proposer:** `@aphelionz` on behalf of `@eqlabs`

**Do you agree to open source all work you do on behalf of this RFP and dual-license under MIT and
APACHE2 licenses?:** Yes

# Project Description

[OrbitDB](https://github.com/orbitdb/orbit-db) is a distributed database engine that stores its
data on IPFS as Conflict-free Replicated Data Types (CRDTs). OrbitDB has a number of prominent
users including [Metamask](https://metamask.io), [bitcoin.com](https://bitcoin.com),
[3Box](https://3box.io/), [AvionDB](https://dbdb.io/db/aviondb),
and [BitcoinCash](https://www.bitcoincash.org/).

Of all the features and improvements requested by our community, reliable pinning is perhaps the
most common. An OrbitDB user wants their data to persist in the distributed swarm safely and
reliably, with minimal configuration and attention required.

> This harmonizes with the adage that token economies work well when they're completely hidden from

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This harmonizes with the adage that token economies work best when they're completely hidden from
```

the user and handle accounting "under the hood". In the case of OrbitDB, the system could
theoretically handle both sides of the the data storage transaction. OrbitDB nodes can be both
miners and requestors of the data stored, and the nature of the commodity that the token represents -
in this case data storage - makes a "take what you give" economy feasible.

If this grant is funded, we will deliver a new Filecoin devnet to power a baseline "net-zero"
community swarm for any OrbitDB instance that wants to opt-in, allowing people to create and

> respond to "replication requests" from each other. This would happen as opaquely as possible, i.e.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
respond to "replication requests" from each other. This would happen as seamlessly as possible, i.e.
```

> it should "just work."

Reviewer: ```suggestion
it should "just work".
```

## Value

At nearly [4,500 GitHub](https://github.com/orbitdb/orbit-db/stargazers) stars, OrbitDB is one of
the more high-profile projects in the `js-ipfs` ecosystem. This means we have a track record of
positive impact OrbitDB has already had on a prominent Protocol Labs project.

The benefits of this have so far been:

1. Raising awareness of IPFS through its transitive use in OrbitDB
2. Driving improvements in IPFS due to community demand and response to OrbitDB

> It follows, then, that something similar could happen with regards to Filecoin. The process of

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It follows, then, that Filecoin could enjoy similar, synergistic effects with OrbitDB. The process of
```

> implementing this pinning network, and the users of the pinning network could provide valuable

Reviewer: ```suggestion
implementing this pinning network and its users are very likely provide valuable
```

context and feedback to the Filecoin Project, and drive the project roadmap forward.

### Risks

Of course, this outcome is not guaranteed, and not without risk. During the initial planning
process the grant team has identified the following risks that could impact either the
implementation process or the desired outcome of the grant effort. Under each risk heading
is a analysis of the risk's likelihood and impact, as well as an analysis and mitigation.

#### Differences between the requirements and design of OrbitDB vs Filecoin

Filecoin's desired sector sizes might be greater than the ones applicable to/practical with OrbitDB
and the uptime requirements in Filecoin might be too strict for non-profit purposes. This is the reason
why we are choosing to create our own DevNet as a "proving ground" for the concept itself since,
despite the name, the devnet would function as intended even without the tokens being traded.

> #### The pinning community's opt-in rates might not fit a net-zero/non-profit mode

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### The pinning community's opt-in rates might not fit net-zero/non-profit scenarios
```

For this concept to work, there will need to be a number of guarantees in place, regardless of

> OrbitDB's requirements - there will need to be enough copies of the data available on the network

Reviewer: ```suggestion
OrbitDB's requirements - a sufficient number of copies of the data need to be available on the network
```

> to pin reliably, which means we will need a consistent amount of online nodes. While we will still

Reviewer: ```suggestion
to pin reliably, which means we will need a consistent number of online nodes. While we will still
```

need more relaxed uptime and smaller sector sizes, Equilibrium can mitigate this risk by
maintaining one or more persistent nodes that can carry a larger amount of data than a typical
OrbitDB node.

#### Last-minute changes/issues with Filecoin network/client behavior

As of this writing, Filecoin is still in active development prior to its planned MainNet launch.

> Things can and will change fast, potentially even after the MainNet launch. The grant team simply

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Things can and will change fast, potentially even after the go-live. The grant team simply
```

accepts this risk and we will plan accordingly. The practical upshot of this is that we will allot
slightly more time in our milestone schedules to account for such contingencies.

### Benefits

If this project succeeds, OrbitDB's users will be happily pinning their data without having to know
too much about the underlying details, and Filecoin will have a successful example of a net-zero,
non-profit pinning community running within its network.

Also, as mentioned in the [value](#value) section above, the effort itself will raise awareness of
Filecoin as well as help steer the roadmap based on real-world usage.

## Deliverables

We plan on breaking this work up into three smaller milestones, described in the next section. At
each milestone, we will deliver:

### Milestone 1 - Research and Design

> - A formalized spec detailing the pinning network's functionality

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- A formalized spec detailing the pinning network's functionality and its economy
```

- A working DevNet with parameters tailored to OrbitDB needs

### Milestone 2 - Implementation

- A public repository with a working implementation of an OrbitDB node equipped with Filecoin
pinning capabilities
- Documentation, tests, and instructions

### Milestone 3 - Launch and Outreach

- One or more blog posts detailing the need and solution presented

> - Social marketing efforts like posts and chat room announcements

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Social marketing efforts like chat room posts and announcements
```

- A docker image with a small OrbitDB net-zero community or node

## Development Roadmap

As per the [Risks](#risks) section, this is subject to change as the project and Filecoin
itself mature over the coming months.

Note: The budget in the milestone is based on the _equivalent_ of one full-time developer working
on the project at a time. This metric is used for ease of understanding and the work may be the
result of many team members via more granular chunks of work.

### Milestone 1 - Research and Design

In this phase we will first set up a DevNet using the
[lotus instructions](ttps://docs.lotu.sh/en+setup-local-dev-nethttps://docs.lotu.sh/en+setup-local-dev-net)

> This DevNet will have reduced sector sizes (perhaps 5-10MB). Relaxing uptime requirements is something

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This DevNet will have significantly reduced sector sizes in order to allow local development. Relaxing uptime requirements is something
```

> that is desired, however this may not be feasible and will require additional research. We will also

Reviewer: ```suggestion
that is desireable, however this may not be feasible and will require additional research. We will also
```

research relationship with "regular" nodes on MainNet, and how that might work.

As for the pinning network itself, the current (rough) design is:

![On Database created](./img/database-created.png)

Upon database creation, the OrbitDB node will also create a Filecoin miner and start its daemon. If they are opted
in, they will join the Filecoin network and make a user-specified amount of storage available.

![Log entries added](./img/log-entries-added.png)

As log entries are added or replicated, the node will first check to see how many copies are currently
on the network. If the number of copies is below a user specified amount (for example, 5 copies) then
a request for storage is sent out to a random miner.

![Replication request received](./img/replication-request-received.png)

Since every OrbitDB node is both a miner and a network user, they can also receive storage requests.
When such a request for storage is received, the node will check its avaialble storage space in its

> sectors, and fulfill the request if it is able.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
sectors, and fulfill the request if it is within its capacity.
```

**Estimated duration:** 2 weeks<br />
**Estimated cost:** 4800€ / 5,390.71 USD

### Milestone 2 - Implementation

#### Milestone 2a - Back-End Filecoin Network Implementation

Once the spec has been created and the design details are more solidified, the next step will

> be to create the implementation in the form of a JavaScript repository that interacts with

Reviewer: ```suggestion
be to create the implementation in the form of a JavaScript implementation that interacts with
```

both OrbitDB and Filecoin.

**Estimated duration:** 3 weeks<br />
**Estimated cost:** 14,400€ / 16,172.14 USD

#### Milestone 2b - Front-End UI Interface

Additionally, we will expand upon the OrbitDB Control Center project to build a UI to make it
simple for users to take advantage of the pinning functionalities, and understand their own
relationship in the context of the network - how much space they are providing, as well as how
much space is available to them and their data.

**Estimated duration:** 2 weeks<br />
**Estimated cost:** 9,600€ / 10,781.42 USD

> ### TODO Milestone 3 - Launch and Outreach

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Milestone 3 - Launch and Outreach
```

> Once the repostitory is created and a suitable version is finalized, then we will begin to seek

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Once the repostitory is created and a suitable version is finalized, we will begin to seek
```

users for testing and feedback. This will involve a number of non-technical efforts, as well as

> a few additional technical efforts:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
a few additional technical endeavors:
```

> - Two blog posts (one at the beginning of this project and one at the end) detailing the plan and outcome

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Two blog posts (one at the beginning of this project and one at the end) detailing the plan and its outcome
```

- Social media posts and attentive responses to comments and questions

> - A docker image that contains either the Filecoin node or a working network

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- A docker image that contains either the enhanced Filecoin+OrbitDB node or a working network of a few nodes
```

There may be additional items here based on community needs and feedback, such as mentoring, but

> these are more difficult to quantify

Reviewer: ```suggestion
these are more difficult to quantify.
```

**Estimated duration:** 2 weeks<br />
**Estimated cost:** 4800€ / 5,390.71 USD

## Total Budget Requested

- **Total estimated duration:** 9 weeks
- **Total estimated cost:** 33,600€ / 37,734.98 USD

## Maintenance and Upgrade Plans

We want to create a codebase that will last into the future. Equilibrium Labs, along with the support
of the community, pledge to continue to maintain the new OrbitDB functionalities to the best of their

> ability and within any financial constraints that exist.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
ability, within any financial constraints that exist.
```

Much like we will build upon community efforts, we will also enable and encourage others to build
upon our work. This will be a twofold effort that includes both permissive licensing and community outreach:
onboarding as many new contributors as possible, mapping the work out into issues of different levels of
difficulty, and providing mentorship.

# Team

The team is comprised of the following [https://equilibrium.co](https://equilibrium.co) team members.

We believe this team is uniquely qualified to complete this task, both the implementation
and communicating with the community in terms of the provided reference implementation and best
practices when using, implementing, and interacting with OrbitDB and Filecoin in general.

## Samuli Pöyhtäri
> [[github](https://github.com/haadcode)] [[linkedin](https://www.linkedin.com/in/samuli/)]

> Samuli is the originating author of OrbitDB and is now CTO at Equilibrium. Formerly CEO at Haja,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Samuli is the originating author of OrbitDB and is now the CTO at Equilibrium. Formerly the CEO at Haja,
```

> Samuli and Vesa-Ville created and published the Ambients Protocol. Samuli has published

Reviewer: a link to Ambients might be a good idea

research related to data interoperability protocols and data structures, as well as several
open source projects and modules for the OrbitDB ecosystem. He was also an early core developer
of IPFS.

## Mark Henderson
> [[github](https://github.com/aphelionz)] [[resume](https://ipfs.io/ipfs/QmcHxD94cvJgq5ZZxQkEi7SRMwD5dBnkhQ3zzaVFqNWFJb)]

> Mark Henderson, is a core contributor to OrbitDB, For over a year, his full-time job was working

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Mark Henderson is a core contributor to OrbitDB. For over a year, his full-time job was working
```

on OrbitDB which, in addition to adding features and increasing performance in the distributed

> OrbitDB system, entailed both dealing personally with the more complex features of IPFS and also

Reviewer: ```suggestion
OrbitDB system, entailed both personally dealing with the more complex features of IPFS and
```

helping community members do the same.

## Vesa-Ville Piiroinen
> [[github](https://github.com/vvp)] [[linkedin](https://www.linkedin.com/in/vesa-ville-piiroinen-5b6b14/)]

Vesa-Ville is the Chief Research Officer at Equilibrium. As former CTO and co-founder of Haja
Networks, he worked on the original theory, research and design of the Ambients, a protocol for
distributing and executing deterministic programs safely in a decentralized, content-addressed
network like IPFS. He has decades of experience in distributed systems, databases, and
interoperability solutions.

> ## Lukasz Jędrzejczy

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Łukasz Jędrzejczyk
```

> ## Lukasz Jędrzejczy

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Lukasz Jędrzejczyk
```

> [[github](https://github.com/ljedrz)] [[linkedin](https://www.linkedin.com/in/ljedrz/)]

> Lukasz Jedrzejczyk is a seasoned blockchain developer with experience with Ethereum

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Lukasz Jedrzejczyk is a seasoned blockchain developer with experience with Concordium
```

> and Substrate. He's also been and has been a proactive contributor to the Rust

Reviewer: ```suggestion
and Substrate. He's also been a proactive contributor to the Rust
```

each milestone, we will deliver the following:

### Milestone 1 - Research and Design

- A formalized spec detailing the pinning network's functionality and its economy
- A working DevNet with parameters tailored to OrbitDB needs

### Milestone 2 - Implementation

- A public repository with a working implementation of an OrbitDB node equipped with Filecoin
pinning capabilities
- Documentation, tests, and instructions

### Milestone 3 - Launch and Outreach

- One or more blog posts detailing the need and solution presented
- Social marketing efforts like posts and chat room announcements
- A docker image with a small OrbitDB net-zero community or node

## Development Roadmap

As per the [Risks](#risks) section, this is subject to change as the project and Filecoin
itself mature over the coming months.

Note: The budget in the milestone is based on the _equivalent_ of one full-time developer working
on the project at a time. This metric is used for ease of understanding and the work may be the
result of many team members via more granular chunks of work.

### Milestone 1 - Research and Design

In this phase we will first set up a DevNet using the

> [lotus instructions](ttps://docs.lotu.sh/en+setup-local-dev-nethttps://docs.lotu.sh/en+setup-local-dev-net)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
[lotus instructions](https://docs.lotu.sh/en+setup-local-dev-net)
```

**Estimated duration:** 2 weeks<br />
**Estimated cost:** 9,600€ / 10,781.42 USD

### Milestone 3 - Launch and Outreach

Once the repostitory is created and a suitable version is finalized, we will begin to seek
users for testing and feedback. This will involve a number of non-technical efforts, as well as
some additional technical endeavors:

- Two blog posts (one at the beginning of this project and one at the end) detailing the plan and its outcome
- Social media posts and attentive responses to comments and questions
- A docker image that contains either the enhanced Filecoin+OrbitDB node or a working network with a few nodes
- Additional technical support on chat platforms such as Gitter, Discord, and Matrix
- Other optimizations and bug fixes that might arise during this period

There may be additional items here based on community needs and feedback, such as mentoring, but
these are more difficult to quantify.

**Estimated duration:** 2 weeks<br />
**Estimated cost:** 4800€ / 5,390.71 USD

## Total Budget Requested

- **Total estimated duration:** 9 weeks
- **Total estimated cost:** 33,600€ / 37,734.98 USD

## Maintenance and Upgrade Plans

> We want to create a codebase that will last into the future. Equilibrium Labs, along with the support

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We want to create a codebase that will last into the future. Equilibrium, along with the support
```
